# NBA Rookie Hall of Fame Prediction
### By Thomas Buck

This project utilized R and R Studio to predict if a player will make the NBA Hall of Fame based on their rookie year. 

### Introduction

Have you ever wondered what getting into the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame takes? The NBA Hall of Fame is one of the most prestigious honors in the entire basketball world, with only [177](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_members_of_the_Naismith_Memorial_Basketball_Hall_of_Fame#:~:text=In%20total%2C%20177%20or%20178,into%20the%20Hall%20of%20Fame) former NBA or ABA (the association before the NBA) players being inducted out of about 4,374 players who have played in at least one [NBA game](https://bleacherreport.com/articles/2854727-bleacher-reports-all-time-player-rankings-nbas-top-50-revealed#:~:text=A%20total%20of%204%2C374%20players,large%20as%20the%20list%20itself). The process to get in involves a holistic view of a player's career with their game-play statistics such as points per game and efficiency rating being important factors. We always think of Hall of Fame players as the best of the best, but were these players truly that far above the pack since the beginning of their NBA career? A rookie year can be an important determinant of a player's future career, so we hope to analyze this indicator of future success. This topic interests us due to our shared interest in NBA basketball and the challenge of predicting a player's future based on their first year in the NBA. In order to explore this area of interest, we needed to find a data set that corresponded to NBA rookies. We eventually found an “NBA rookies” data set and will use it to predict if a given player will get into the Hall of Fame from only their rookie year statistics. More specifically, we pose the question “How many points must a player average and how efficient must a player be in their rookie year to be considered for Hall of Fame induction?” Additionally, we want to question the validity of using a rookie's performance as an adequate predictor of a future career by answering “Is there a significant difference in a Hall of Fame player's rookie year points per game and efficiency per game vs. non-Hall of Fame players rookie year points per game and efficiency per game?” To answer these, we will examine trends in points per game and efficiency rating stratified by Hall of Fame players and non-Hall of Fame players. We believe that there is a significant difference between Hall of Fame players performances in their rookie year versus non-Hall of Fame players in their rookie year. We also believe points per game and efficiency rating are relatively good indicators of the chances a rookie will make the Hall of Fame.

## Data Description

The first data set contains rookie data from 1980 to 2016 about a player's statistics in their rookie season in the NBA. The data set comes from [data.world](https://data.world/gmoney/nba-rookies-by-min-1980-2016/workspace/project-summary?agentid=gmoney&datasetid=nba-rookies-by-min-1980-2016) and the user who created and posted the data goes by username "gmoney". The user got all statistics and information from NBA.com, the official website of the National Basketball Association. NBA.com has an “all player stats” section where one can filter by season (i.e. year) and “Rookies”. The user scraped this webpage using various web scraping techniques and then inputted the information into a CSV file so analysis could be conducted in a more accessible fashion. All variables within the rookie data set are on a per-game basis. For example, if the points column says 15.0, that player averages 15 points per game. This data set also contains a Hall of Fame variable that has a year as the value if the player made the Hall of Fame. Due to the long process it takes to get into the Hall of Fame (players have to wait a couple years after they retire), the most recent Hall of Fame rookie we have is from about 2005, so whenever we use data on only Hall of Fame rookies, the timeline of our data is from 1980 to 2005, so graphics plotting only Hall of Fame rookies will only go from 1980 to around 2005. 

The second data set we will be using is NBA player data found on [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/drgilermo/nba-players-stats?select=Players.csv) and was created and posted by Omri Goldstein. All information in the data was scraped by Omri Goldstein using various web scraping techniques from Basketball Reference. The data contains information about every NBA player since 1950. The data set contains the height, weight, college attended, birth year, and birth location of every player in the data set. We combined these data sets by name to add these columns to our rookie data frame. We will utilize the height of each rookie to construct a linear regression model to predict how many points a rookie of a given height will average.

The data is relatively comprehensive, however, it should be noted this data does have a larger population which would be all rookies that have ever been in the NBA from its beginning (so prior to 1980 and after 2016). When analyzing the Hall of Fame players, it can best be described as a sample of players in the Hall of Fame since there is a large number of players inducted into the Hall of Fame that were drafted before 1980. Therefore, the larger population for the Hall of Fame sample is all NBA players ever inducted into the Hall of Fame. 

The remainder of the report will attempt to determine the expected stat line of a Hall of Fame player in their rookie year. We hope to determine if there is a statistically significant difference between Hall of Fame rookie statistics versus non-Hall of Fame rookie statistics. Other analysis to be explored is attempting to predict a Hall of Fame rookies points per game based solely on their height and to determine is there is a statistically significant relationship between the two variables.

We will use points and efficiency because they are primary statistics associated with any given player and are often used to gauge a player’s success. It is important to consider, however, that a player’s success is not solely contingent on points which is why we are also analyzing efficiency, a holistic measure of a players impact. Its values come from the equation: (Points + Rebounds (missed shot and grabbed ball)  + Assists (passed to a player who scored) + Steals (took the ball from the other team) + Blocks (blocked a shot) − Missed Field Goals(missed shot attempt) − Missed Free Throws - Turnovers (lost possession of the ball to another team) / Games Played. 

**Variables**\
- Points: Player’s average number of points per game\
- Efficiency: Holistic measure of the player’s success\ 
(Points + Rebounds + Assists + Steals + Blocks − Missed Field Goals − Missed Free Throws - Turnovers) / Games Played\
- Height: Height of the player in centimeters\
- Weight: Weight of a player in kilograms\
- Hall of Fame: Year the player was inducted to the Hall of Fame, NA if the player did not make the Hall of Fame\

As stated before, we believe making the Hall of Fame is a very prestigious award that only a small fraction of NBA players achieve. We find that our data also represents this since only 2.83% of the rookies in our data set were eventually inducted into the Hall of Fame and 97.17% were never inducted. 
Let's look at how these Hall of Fame players compare to non-Hall of Fame players in various aspects.
